[PR-1190] Article about typescript for haskellers (#5)
serokell/blog-posts: typescript-for-haskellers/article.md

We also will not say anything about the disadvantages of TypeScript's type system vs. Haskell's or how it works under the hood.
Our goal is to show how you can use types in TypeScript.

## Why TypeScript?

Historically, any new language that allow you to write web applications translates its code to JavaScript.
And there are a lot of such languages and language extensions: TypeScript, Kotlin JS, CoffeeScript, Scala JS, Babel, ClojureScript, etc.
Generally, you can write web applications in almost every language.

Because we like Haskell, maybe we can write our Web application in a functional language (or even in Haskell)? The answer is yes.
There is strongly-typed PureScript with Haskell-like syntax, purely functional Elm, Reflex framework for Haskell with GHCJS, F# with Fabel.

Unfortunately, these don't give us proper flexibility in working with JS libraries (whose numbers are enormous) and take more time on fixing related problems.
Additionally, customers will be locked in when they will need to maintain such applications.
On the other hand, TypeScript, which has a huge community and modern technologies out from the box, is a great decision.

> ## Base concepts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Basic concepts
```

```typescript
const arrLength: <T>(_: T[]) => number = (arr) => arr.length;

arrLength([1, 2, 3]); // 3
arrLength<string>(["1", "2"]); // 2
arrLength<number>(["1", "2", "3"]); // Type 'string' is not assignable to type 'number'.

type NonEmpty<T> = {
  head: T;
  tail: T[];
};
```

#### Ad-hoc polymorphism

Ad hoc polymorphism allows you to implement abstract functions, which logic will be different with different types.

Let's define interface `Eq`

```typescript

interface Eq<T> {
  equal: (f: T, s: T) => boolean;
}
```

And now two implementations of it: `IntEq` for numbers and `IntArrEq` for arrays of numbers.
The first one will simply compare two numbers.
And the second one will return equality if the first array contain all elements from the second array.

```typescript
class IntEq implements Eq<number> {
  equal(f: number, s: number) {
    return f === s;
  }
}

class IntArrEq implements Eq<number[]> {
  equal(f: number[], s: number[]) {
    return f.filter(item => s.indexOf(item) < 0).length === 0;
  }
}
```

Now let's implement `lookup` function which for key value pairs array and specific key will return the value associated with this key or `undefined`.

> We can write it polymorph passing comparator class which implements `Eq` for the key type.

Reviewer: I don't grasp this sentence. 

"We can make it polymorphic by passing a comparator class that implements `Eq` for the key type"?

Developer must be cautious to propagate the full type-level information when they need it.

```typescript
type fnT = <T>(v: T & { x: number }) => T & { x: number }
// You should fully describe all types to not lose information.

type A = {};
type B = A & {x: number};

let a: A = {};
const b: B = {x: 1};
a = b;
a.x; // Property 'x' does not exist on type 'A'.
```

### Mapped types, Conditional types and Type families

One useful type functionality of TypeScript are Mapped and Conditional types.
They give us really flexible ability to modify existing types or create now one.

#### Mapped types

Mapped types allows you to create new types based on old types transforming them in some way.
The syntax looks like `[set of field names]: type;`.
For example, you can add optional modifier or readonly modifier to each field with `type Partial<T> = { [P in keyof T]?: T[P] }` and `type Readonly<T> = { readonly [P in keyof T]: T[P] }`.
It is also possible to remove such modifiers using `-?` and `-readonly`.

The `keyof` operator in the code below produces a union of properties name.
Square brackets indicates computed names.
And `in` operator goes over all field keys.

> `Partial` type adds `?` modifier for each property.

Reviewer: It seems that you now have two examples of the same thing. 

I would just do this section like this: 

* Syntax looks like this. 
* Example 
* Explanation of the syntax
* You can also remove properties
* Example

```typescript
type Partial<T> = { [P in keyof T]?: T[P] };

type A = { x: number; y: number };
type PartialA = Partia<A>;

const a: A = { x: 1 }; // Property 'y' is missing in type '{ x: number; }' but required in type 'A'.
const a: PartialA = { x: 1 }; // Ok
```

Let's try now to remove `?` and `readonly` modifier from all properties.

```typescript
type NoModifiers<T> = { -readonly [P in keyof T]-?: T[P] };

type A = { readonly x?: number; readonly y?: number };
type NoModifiersA = NoModifiers<A>;

const a: A = { x: 1 }; // Ok
a.x = 1; // Cannot assign to 'x' because it is a read-only property.

const a: NoModifiersA = { x: 1 }; // Property 'y' is missing in type '{ x: number; }' but required in type 'NoModifiers<A>'
const a: NoModifiersA = { x: 1, y: 2 }; // Ok
a.x = 2; // Ok
```

Let's present some complex examples of mapped types usage.

Defining type which contains string and numerical properties.

```typescript
type Point = {
  x: number;
  y: number;
  0: string;
}
```

Now, using mapped types we will create a type which will pick only some properties.

> Word `extends` here say that generic `K` will contain a subset of union properties keys `T`.

Reviewer: contain a subset of union properties keys `T` 

Something is not correct here grammar-wise, I can't parse it.  

Will contain a subset of the properties of `T`. <- does this work? 

In particular, is there a specific reason why you need to mention union all the time?

Author: > Will contain a subset of the properties of T.

Yes, it should work

> In particular, is there a specific reason why you need to mention union all the time?

So, mentioning `union` is like true name of what we have. I can mention it for example two times and then use just `set of properties` for example.

Reviewer: Oh haha. :) Yeah, that should work.

Reviewer: Grokked it and changed it.

And the resulting type will contain only properties from `K`.

```typescript
type Pick<T, K extends keyof T> = {
  [P in K]: T[P];
};

type PointValues = Pick<Point, "x" | 0> // type PointValues = { x: number; 0: number }
```

The next example will be more complex.
We will try to create the type which produce type with getters for all string properties.

To implement it lets firstly define helper type `Getter`.
Capitalize is a build in type which may be applied for the string type.

> So, for `T` which extends string we can produce getter specific name.

Reviewer: Didn't get this sentence.

Reviewer: @sashasashasasha151 it's still there, in particular, I don't understand what is a getter-specific name.

```typescript

> type Getter<T extends string> = `get${Capitalize<T>}`;

Reviewer: Do you need to capitalize? It doesn't seem relevant for illustrating any getter, and then you won't need to explain it.

Author: >Do you need to capitalize?

Without capitalize it will look like `getsomething`. And usually you need to somehow separate the words.\
I really like this example as it show how you can change types using `` and how complex mapped types can be

Reviewer: Ok, sure. 👍

```

And finally we can implement `Getters` type.
Type `Extract` extract from type all union members which are assignable to some type.
So, here for each property name `K` in `T` which is assignable to `string` we create getter property name with type `() => T[K]`.

```typescript
type Getters<T> = {
    [K in keyof T as Getter<Extract<K, string>>]: () => T[K];
}

type PointGetters = Getters<Point> // type PointValues = { getX: () => number; getY: () => number; }
```

#### Conditional types

> Another great feature is conditional types.

Reviewer: Structure is a bit off. 

I would just:

give a definition
show basic example 
tell that it can be used in conjunction with mapped types for that and that 
give a definition of distributed conditional types
show an example 

so that you are not jumping around stuff

It allows you to choose the type based on some condition expressed as another type.
Using `extends` word you are able to make a condition `T extends U ? X : Y`.
It also allows you to not only choose from two types, but from many types `T extends U ? X : T extends W ? Y : Z`.
With such functionality you may implement things which may resemble type families although not quite right.
Anyway in conjunction with mapped types it is a great feature to manage your types.
One thing to note are union types.
Conditional types with union types are called Distributive Conditional Types and their work may look a little confused.
But we will explain them on examples.

> Here is the base example of conditional types.

Reviewer: This should be right after the definition.

Type `B` extends `A` but type `C` doesn't.
And `Condition` type will return one type if `T extends V` and another one otherwise.

```typescript
type A = { x: number };
type B = { x: number; y: number };
type C = { y: number };

type Condition<T, V> = T extends V ? number : string;

type N = Condition<B, A>; // type N = number
type E = Condition<C, A>; // type E = string
```

Let's move to the Distributive Conditional Types.

> `Exclude` type may looks strange, but what if we will pass union types here?

Reviewer: I have to say I cannot understand this.

Author: Hm, I just say that `Exclude` is strange but with `union types` as type argument it is not strange and below is an explanation

Taking properties of `T` using `keyof T` we exclude from them properties which names are written in `K` and then simply pick remaining ones using `Pick` from the example above.

```typescript
type Omit<T, K> = Pick<T, Exclude<keyof T, K>>;

type Point = {
  x: number;
  y: number;
  z: number;
}

type PointX = Omit<Point, "y" | "z">; // type PointX = { x: number }
```

TypeScript [contains](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/utility-types.html) a lot of predefined conditional and mapped types, so you can use them from the box.

## Going deeper

Build-in concepts are good.
But as you can see, TypeScript type system is not really a weak one.
Adding our knowledge from Haskell and type theory we can think about how to get more from this system and what we can build using it.
This part will show very brief descriptions of different approaches.
But links, mentioned below, on references and other articles must help you to deeply understand them.

### HKT

You may see that TypeScript type system is not so bad as one may think.
But it has one important limitation -- absence of kinds.
Higher-Kinded Types allow us to write types which have their own type constructors as parameters.

> So, using generics instead of abstracting only over types we are able to abstract over types which already abstract over types.

Reviewer: :advanced-types: 

I think this can be written simpler.

Unfortunately we can't write such code and TypeScript type system doesn't allow it.
```typescript
interface Collection<F> {
  create: <A>() => F<A>; // Type 'F' is not generic.
  insert: <A>(v: A) => (c: F<A>) => F<A>; // Type 'F' is not generic.
}

const collectionArray: Collection<Array> = {
  create: () => [],
  insert: (v) => (c: number[]) => [...c, v]
};
```

> Fortunately we are able to simulate kinds using defunctionalization which allows us to translate higher-order programs into a first-order language.

Reviewer: Is there some link to defunctionalization available? https://blog.sigplan.org/2019/12/30/defunctionalization-everybody-does-it-nobody-talks-about-it/ I found smth like this

Author: Hm, on wiki https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Defunctionalization

The main idea is to map type constructors names to their implementations.
Using it we will be able to write type Kind which work with `* -> *` constructors, Kind2 for `* -> * -> *`, and so on.

Let's define two types: `URItoKind` and `URItoKind2`. They will be our identifiers for 1-arity and 2-arity types.
And `URIS` with `URIS2` will be a present of all such types.
Type `unknown` is a more type-safe representation of `any` which force us to do some checks before doing actions with values of this type.

```typescript
type URItoKind<A> = {
  'Array': Array<A>;
  'Set': Set<A>;
}

type URItoKind2<A, B> = {
  'Map': Map<A, B>;
}

type URIS = keyof URItoKind<unknown>;
type URIS2 = keyof URItoKind2<unknown, unknown>;
```

So, now we are ready to present our kinds.

> They take an identifier property as the first type parameter and its type parameters for this identifier.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They take an identifier property as the first type parameter and its type parameters for this identifier as the second one. 
```

You have an unfinished sentence, I assume this is the full one.

We implement new `Collection` instance with `Set`.
And then write generic function `f` over `Collection`.
The last thing you need to do is to pass implementation as a function argument.

```typescript
const collectionSet: Collection<"Set"> = {
    create: () => new Set(),
    insert: (v, c) => c.add(v),
};

const f = <F extends URIS, A>(C: Collection<F>, v1: A, v2: A) => {
    const newCollection = C.create<A>();
    return C.insert(v2, C.insert(v1, newCollection));
};

f(collectionArray, 1, 2); // [ 1, 2 ]
f(collectionSet, 2, 2); // Set(1) { 2 }
```

Of course this is a tiny set of what you can do with kinds.
Most of all this part is inspired by [fp-ts](https://gcanti.github.io/fp-ts/) library and [Yuriy Bogomolov](https://ybogomolov.me/) blog.
Fp-ts contains tone of things which you may know from Haskell and in blog you can find great explanations of it.
Also, there are a lot of libraries based on fp-ts: [io-ts](https://github.com/gcanti/io-ts), [parser-ts](https://github.com/gcanti/parser-ts), [monocle-ts](https://github.com/gcanti/monocle-ts), [remote-data-ts](https://github.com/devex-web-frontend/remote-data-ts), etc.

### Peano numbers

> Moving deeper we can think about type level programming and more concretely about computational on types.

Reviewer: computations on types?

```

And the main type `Vec` combine them with conditional type.
Using word `infer` we are able to infer new type variable `R` from `N`.
So, when `N` is a `Succ` we can infer nested `R` from it and return `Cons<A, R>`.
Otherwise, it is simply `Nil`.

```typescript
type Vec<A, N extends Nat> = N extends Succ<infer R> ? Cons<A, R> : Nil;
```

And here are examples of its usage.
We define two helper function which build `Vec` values.
And as you can see may use it safely.

```typescript
const emptyVec: <A>() => Vec<A, Zero> = () => "nil";

const pushVec: <A, N extends Nat>(a: A, v: Vec<A, N>) => Vec<A, Succ<N>> = (a, v) => {
  return {a, v}
};

let empty: Vec<number, Zero> = emptyVec(); // Ok
let oneElem: Vec<number, Succ<Zero>> = pushVec(1, empty); // Ok
let twoElems: Vec<number, Succ<Succ<Zero>>> = pushVec(2, oneElem); // Ok
let twoElemsInvalid: Vec<number, Succ<Zero>> = pushVec(2, oneElem); // error
oneElem = twoElems; // error
```

This was a simple example what we can do with type level programming.
Using such primitives we can implement different operations on types and even Fibonacci [implementation](https://mjj.io/2021/03/29/type-level-programming-in-typescript/) for example.

> Follow Mathias Jean Johansen [blog post](https://mjj.io/2021/03/29/type-level-programming-in-typescript/) or mentioned above Yuriy Bogomolov [examples](https://github.com/YBogomolov/talk-typelevel-ts/blob/master/src/typelevel.d.ts).

Reviewer: Linking one blog post two lines in a row is a big no-no, can you squeeze these two lines into one?

(You can read our reasoning for that in our [introductory blog post](https://serokell.io/blog/why-typescript).)
But our main programming language is Haskell. And in this article, we want to explain how Haskell knowledge can help you write TypeScript code.

In this article, we don't have the goal to cover all similarities or differences.
We also will not say anything about the disadvantages of TypeScript's type system vs. Haskell's or how it works under the hood.
Our goal is to show how you can use types in TypeScript.

## Why TypeScript?

Historically, any new language that allow you to write web applications translates its code to JavaScript.
And there are a lot of such languages and language extensions: TypeScript, Kotlin JS, CoffeeScript, Scala JS, Babel, ClojureScript, etc.
Generally, you can write web applications in almost every language.

Because we like Haskell, maybe we can write our Web application in a functional language (or even in Haskell)? The answer is yes.
There is strongly-typed PureScript with Haskell-like syntax, purely functional Elm, Reflex framework for Haskell with GHCJS, F# with Fabel.

> Unfortunately, these don't give us proper flexibility in working with JS libraries (whose numbers are enormous) and take more time on fixing related problems.

Reviewer: What do you mean by "related problems"?

Author: Related to libraries management \
Choosing what libs are available, somehow import unavailable libs

    case "And":
      return expr.proof(interpret(expr.l) && interpret(expr.r));
    default:
      return expr;
  }
};

const testExpr = and(gt(plus(num(23), num(12)), num(170)), gt(num(35), num(47)));
interpret(testExpr); // false

const wrongExpr = and(num(23), num(12)); // Argument of type 'ArithExpr<number>' is not assignable to parameter of type 'ArithExpr<boolean>'.
```

#### Tagless final eDSL

Another way to implement an eDSL is [tagless final](https://serokell.io/blog/introduction-tagless-final).
Moving from data type to type class we are able to implement the same logic.

Let's start with defining our type class.
To do this, we need the already-mentioned `URIS`, which is a union of all 1-arity defined in `URItoKind`, and also already-mentioned `Kind`.

```typescript
import { Kind, URIS } from "fp-ts/HKT";

type ArithExpr<Expr extends URIS> = {
  num: (v: number) => Kind<Expr, number>;
  plus: (l: Kind<Expr, number>, r: Kind<Expr, number>) => Kind<Expr, number>;
  gt: (l: Kind<Expr, number>, r: Kind<Expr, number>) => Kind<Expr, boolean>;
  and: (l: Kind<Expr, boolean>, r: Kind<Expr, boolean>) => Kind<Expr, boolean>;
};
```

> Now, we will present our types for which we will create `ArithExpr` instances.

Reviewer: What does present mean here?

Author: Like show

let oneElem: Vec<number, Succ<Zero>> = pushVec(1, empty); // Ok
let twoElems: Vec<number, Succ<Succ<Zero>>> = pushVec(2, oneElem); // Ok
let twoElemsInvalid: Vec<number, Succ<Zero>> = pushVec(2, oneElem); // error
oneElem = twoElems; // error
```

This was a simple example what we can do with type level programming.
Using such primitives, we can implement different operations on types and even a Fibonacci [implementation](https://mjj.io/2021/03/29/type-level-programming-in-typescript/), for example.
Follow Mathias Jean Johansen's [blog post](https://mjj.io/2021/03/29/type-level-programming-in-typescript/) or above-mentioned Yuriy Bogomolov's [examples](https://github.com/YBogomolov/talk-typelevel-ts/blob/master/src/typelevel.d.ts).

```typescript
type Fibonacci<N, F0 = Zero, F1 = One> = {
  acc: F0
  n: N extends Succ<infer _> ? Fibonacci<Decrement<N>, F1, Add<F0, F1>> : never
}[IfElse<Equals<Zero, N>, "acc", "n">]
```

### GADT and eDSL

#### GADT

Generalized algebraic data types in Haskell give us an ability to manually write types of the constructors.
Having data type `D a` with type value `a` we are able to create constructors like `C :: Int -> D Int`.

> The key feature here is that Haskell may say us about equality of types `a` and `Int` here.

Reviewer: This line is a bit oddly worded, could you try to rephrase. In particular, "Haskell may say us".

The other great feature of this approach is that we can make nice eDSL using GADT.
And again TypeScript will not give you such a good eDSL as a result, but it doesn't mean that we can't do it.

> TypeScript on the other hand doesn't have equality inference.

Reviewer: Missing the first hand, perhaps some changes messed the flow up.

Nevertheless, we can manually provide such equality to it as a value.

We will use `fp-ts` here and later as it has a lot of build in useful types and functions.

> ```typescript

Reviewer: What's happening here? No text points to it.

import { identity } from "fp-ts/lib/function";
```

The next step in `Equality` definition.
To provide equality as a value we use Leibniz equality.
Here is a simplified version of it.
Interface `Equality` is a Hybrid Type which gives an ability for object act as a function.

> Then in `ArithExpr` we simplify `Equality<A, B>` into an identity `(a: A) => A`.

Reviewer: The explanation is too far from the thing explained.

Author: Hm, how to write it here? To somehow explain `Equality` I need to say about things described below but describing such things without `Equality` explanation is not really good

  return { type: "Gt", l, r, proof: identity };
};

const and: (l: ArithExpr<boolean>, r: ArithExpr<boolean>) => ArithExpr<boolean> = (l, r) => {
  return { type: "And", l, r, proof: identity };
};
```

The last step will be just `interpret` implementation.
Switching on `expr.type` we construct our result running `interpret` on nested expressions and proofing resulted types with the proof from this `expr`.

```typescript
const interpret: <A>(expr: ArithExpr<A>) => A = (expr) => {
  switch (expr.type) {
    case "Num":
      return expr.proof(expr.v);
    case "Plus":
      return expr.proof(interpret(expr.l) + interpret(expr.r));
    case "Gt":
      return expr.proof(interpret(expr.l) > interpret(expr.r));
    case "And":
      return expr.proof(interpret(expr.l) && interpret(expr.r));
    default:
      return expr;
  }
};

const testExpr = and(gt(plus(num(23), num(12)), num(170)), gt(num(35), num(47)));
interpret(testExpr); // false

const wrongExpr = and(num(23), num(12)); // Argument of type 'ArithExpr<number>' is not assignable to parameter of type 'ArithExpr<boolean>'.
```

#### Tagless final eDSL

Another way to implement eDSL is tagless final.

> Moving from data type to type class we are able to implement the same logic.

Reviewer: Don't get this line.

Let's start from defining our type class.

> To make this we need already known `URIS` which is a union of all 1-arity defined in `URItoKind`.

Reviewer: Should it be 1-arities? (e.g. plural)

And also already known `Kind`.

```typescript
import { Kind, URIS } from "fp-ts/HKT";

type ArithExpr<Expr extends URIS> = {
  num: (v: number) => Kind<Expr, number>;
  plus: (l: Kind<Expr, number>, r: Kind<Expr, number>) => Kind<Expr, number>;
  gt: (l: Kind<Expr, number>, r: Kind<Expr, number>) => Kind<Expr, boolean>;
  and: (l: Kind<Expr, boolean>, r: Kind<Expr, boolean>) => Kind<Expr, boolean>;
};
```

Now, we will present our types for which we will create `ArithExpr` instances.
The first one will be just interpreter.

> And the second one will create string representation of expression.

Reviewer: You can insert the types here, I think. 

We need the description to be as maximally close to the code as possible.

* `symbol` lets you declare const-named properties on types.
* `unique` means that the type is unique – your type is tagged with a unique symbol.

By using [`as`](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/basic-types.html#type-assertions) (which does type assertion), you can cast your base type to a tagged type.
And when you try to pass a value of another tagged type, the compiler says that the two unique symbols are different.

```typescript
function sendMessage(email: Email);

sendMessage("message"); // Argument of type 'string' is not assignable to parameter of type 'Email'.
sendMessage("St. Petersburg" as City); // Argument of type 'City' is not assignable to parameter of type 'Email'.

sendMessage("email@gmail.com" as Email); // Ok
```

Anyway, this is not an ideal solution for newtypes.
There is a [comment](https://github.com/Microsoft/TypeScript/issues/4895#issuecomment-401067935) in issue with a better solution.
And there is also a [library](https://github.com/sveseme/taghiro), which provides a prettier implementation for them.

> ### Unit types, unions, data types, and pattern matching

Reviewer: Could this section be called ADTs in TypeScript?

Author: Not sure if it will be a right definition but in article title context I think we can do it

Author: Maybe just ADTs or Algebraic data types? To not explicitly mention TypeScript

Reviewer: Yeah, that is fine.

With `extends`, you are able to make a condition: `T extends U ? X : Y`.
It also allows you to choose not only from two but from many types: `T extends U ? X : T extends W ? Y : Z`.
With such functionality, you can implement things that resemble [type families](https://serokell.io/blog/type-families-haskell), although they are not quite like them.
Anyway, in conjunction with mapped types, it is a great feature to manage your types.

One thing to note is union types.
Conditional types together with union types are called distributive conditional types, and how they work might be a little bit confusing.
But we will explain them with examples.

Here is a basic example of a conditional type.
Type `B` extends `A`, but type `C` doesn't.
And `Condition` type will return one type if `T extends V` and another one otherwise.

```typescript
type A = { x: number };
type B = { x: number; y: number };
type C = { y: number };

type Condition<T, V> = T extends V ? number : string;

type N = Condition<B, A>; // type N = number
type E = Condition<C, A>; // type E = string
```

Let's move to distributive conditional types.
`Exclude` type may look strange, but what if we will pass union types here?

> It will simply exclude such types in union `T` which exists in union `U` setting `never` in other cases, where the [`never`](https://www.tutorialsteacher.com/typescript/typescript-never) type describes the type of values that will never occur.

Reviewer: What does "return never in other cases" mean here?

Author: Oh, not in other cases) \
Basically it is not returning smth but, 🤔, setting the type \
But `_ ? _ : _` construction is known as a ternary operator and saying `return`, as for me, sounds more understandable here \
So, I will change it, but maybe we can leave `return` here

```typescript
type fnT = <T>(v: T & { x: number }) => T & { x: number }
// You should fully describe all types to not lose information.

type A = {};
type B = A & {x: number};

let a: A = {};
const b: B = {x: 1};
a = b;
a.x; // Property 'x' does not exist on type 'A'.
```

### Mapped types, conditional types, and type families

[Mapped](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/2/mapped-types.html) and [conditional](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/2/conditional-types.html) types are a rather practical part of TypeScript.
They give us the flexibility to modify existing types or create new ones out of them.

#### Mapped types

Mapped types allow you to create new types based on old types by transforming them in some way.
The syntax looks like this: `[set of field names]: type;`.
For example, you can add an optional modifier or a readonly modifier to each field with `type Partial<T> = { [P in keyof T]?: T[P] }` and `type Readonly<T> = { readonly [P in keyof T]: T[P] }`, respectively.

```typescript
type Partial<T> = { [P in keyof T]?: T[P] };

type A = { x: number; y: number };

> type PartialA = Partia<A>;

Reviewer: You sure this compiled? :) 

```suggestion
type PartialA = Partial<A>;
```

```

Now, using mapped types, we will create a type that will pick only some of the properties.
Word `extends` here says that generic `K` will contain a subset of union properties keys `T`.
And the resulting type will contain only properties from `K`.

```typescript
type Pick<T, K extends keyof T> = {
  [P in K]: T[P];
};

type PointValues = Pick<Point, "x" | 0> // type PointValues = { x: number; 0: number }
```

The next example will be more complex.
We will try to create the type which produces a type with getters for all string properties.

To implement it, let's first define a `Getter` helper type.
Capitalize is a built-in type, which may be applied to the string type.
So, for `T`, which extends string, we can produce getter specific name.

```typescript
type Getter<T extends string> = `get${Capitalize<T>}`;
```

And finally, we can implement the `Getters` type.
Type `Extract` extracts from a type all union members that are assignable to some type.
So, here for each property name `K` in `T` that is assignable to `string`, we create a getter property name with type `() => T[K]`.

```typescript
type Getters<T> = {
    [K in keyof T as Getter<Extract<K, string>>]: () => T[K];
}

> type PointGetters = Getters<Point> // type PointValues = { getX: () => number; getY: () => number; }

Reviewer: I assume it should be like this: 

```suggestion
type PointGetters = Getters<Point> // type PointGetters = { getX: () => number; getY: () => number; }
```

```typescript
const a: { readonly x: number } = { x: 1 };

const changeA = (arg: { x: number }): void => {
  const argC = arg;
  argC.x = 2;
}

changeA(a);
a.x; // 2
```

For this reason, you should always write proper types of arguments.

#### `Readonly` type

With the [`Readonly`](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/utility-types.html#readonlytype) type, you can mark all properties as `readonly`.

```typescript
type A = {
  x: number;
  y: number;
};

type ImmutableA = Readonly<A>; 
const a: ImmutableA = { x: 1, y: 2 };
a.x = 2; // Cannot assign to 'x' because it is a read-only property.
a.y = 1; // Cannot assign to 'y' because it is a read-only property.
```

With `ReadonlyArray`, you can make all array elements `readonly`.

```typescript
const arr: ReadonlyArray<number> = [1, 2, 3];
arr[0] = 4; // Index signature in type 'readonly number[]' only permits reading.
```

You can also make a `readonly` dictionary, for example:

```typescript
interface A {
    readonly [x: string]: number;
}

const a: A = { x: 1, y: 2 };
a.x = 2; // Index signature in type 'A' only permits reading.

> a.y = 1; // Index signature in type 'A' only permits reading.

Reviewer 2: Is it a clarifying comment, or some error that will be thrown here? If this is an error, is it a compile-time or runtime error? I would tell this clearly in places like this.

Author: There are no runtime errors in the article. I will mark it as error, but don't know if marking it as a compile time error will be useful

Author: And comments will be just comments, is it okay?

By adding our knowledge from Haskell and type theory, we can get more from this type system.
This part will show very brief descriptions of different approaches. 
We have also added links to references and other articles to help you understand them more deeply, if necessary.

### HKTs

As we said before, TypeScript's type system is not as bad as one may think.
But it has one significant limitation: the absence of [kinds](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kind_(type_theory)).
Higher-kinded types let us to write types that have their own type constructors as parameters.
So, with them, we can create another level of abstraction.
For example, imagine that your generic type is not just a specific type, but a type constructor like `Map` or `Array` that is waiting for its own generic type to be specified.

Let's take a look at an example of a theoretical implementation, which, unfortunately, TypeScript's type system doesn't allow.

```typescript
interface Collection<F> {
  create: <A>() => F<A>; // Type 'F' is not generic.
  insert: <A>(v: A) => (c: F<A>) => F<A>; // Type 'F' is not generic.
}

const collectionArray: Collection<Array> = {
  create: () => [],

>   insert: (v) => (c: number[]) => [...c, v]

Reviewer 2: This `...` seems like a new, yet unexplained, syntax.

```typescript
type Cons<A, N extends Nat> = {a: A, v: Vec<A, N>};
```

And the main type, `Vec`, combines them by using a conditional type.

```typescript
type Vec<A, N extends Nat> = N extends Succ<infer R> ? Cons<A, R> : Nil;
```

Using [`infer`](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/release-notes/typescript-2-8.html#type-inference-in-conditional-types), we are able to infer a new type variable `R` from `N`.
So, when `N` is a `Succ`, we can infer a nested `R` from it and return `Cons<A, R>`.
Otherwise, it is `Nil`.

And here are examples of `Vec`'s usage.
We define two helper functions that build `Vec` values.
And, as you can see, we can use it safely.

```typescript
const emptyVec: <A>() => Vec<A, Zero> = () => "nil";

const pushVec: <A, N extends Nat>(a: A, v: Vec<A, N>) => Vec<A, Succ<N>> = (a, v) => {
  return {a, v}
};

let empty: Vec<number, Zero> = emptyVec(); // Ok
let oneElem: Vec<number, Succ<Zero>> = pushVec(1, empty); // Ok
let twoElems: Vec<number, Succ<Succ<Zero>>> = pushVec(2, oneElem); // Ok
let twoElemsInvalid: Vec<number, Succ<Zero>> = pushVec(2, oneElem); // error
oneElem = twoElems; // error

> ```

Reviewer 2: Just a question to satisfy my curiosity: could I use plain type-level number instead of Peano numbers? Or arithmetic operations and conditions do not work on plain type-level numbers?

Author: Hm, I was trying to understand how to do it, but I don't really understand how to write it. If you mean smth like:

```typescript
type Vec<A, N extends number> = N extends 0 ? Nil : Cons<A, N - 1>;
```

Then no, it is not possible

If you meant smth different may you please write an example on pseudo code

Reviewer 2: Yes, exactly so. I see

    case "Gt":
      return expr.proof(interpret(expr.l) > interpret(expr.r));
    case "And":
      return expr.proof(interpret(expr.l) && interpret(expr.r));
    default:
      return expr;
  }
};

const testExpr = and(gt(plus(num(23), num(12)), num(170)), gt(num(35), num(47)));
interpret(testExpr); // false

const wrongExpr = and(num(23), num(12)); // Argument of type 'ArithExpr<number>' is not assignable to parameter of type 'ArithExpr<boolean>'.
```

For a deeper understanding of this, you can check the [original](http://code.slipthrough.net/2016/08/10/approximating-gadts-in-purescript/) PureScript article and also Giulio Canti's [example](https://gist.github.com/gcanti/9a0c2a666621f03b80457831ff3ab997) (on which this part is based on) of its implementation in TypeScript.

#### Tagless final eDSL

Another way to implement an eDSL is [tagless final](https://serokell.io/blog/introduction-tagless-final).
We can move from data type to type classes with the same logic.
Here the type class will describe possible actions, and by using instances, we will be able to write interpreters.

Let's start by defining our type class.

> To do this, we need the already-mentioned `URIS`(which is a union of all 1-arity defined in `URItoKind`) and the already-mentioned `Kind`.

Reviewer 2: You can also say here, that you represent the type class as a dictionary of related methods carried in a mere type. That jump from Haskell type classes to the TS code with a record type was just too big.

Author: It was described in `HKT` part. But I think your explanation is better, so I can move it to the `HKT` part

Author: Ah, okay, I misunderstood you \

Reviewer 2: Ah no, looks good to me now. Here you said "defining our type class" but TS has no typeclasses. And now when you in HKT section describe what you mean under TS typeclasses, "defining our type class" makes sense.

```

Above, [`unknown`](https://mariusschulz.com/blog/the-unknown-type-in-typescript) is a more type-safe representation of `any` that forces us to do some checks before doing actions with values of this type.

Our kinds take an identifier property as the first type parameter, and the rest of parameters are type parameters of this identifier.

```typescript
type Kind<F extends URIS, A> = URItoKind<A>[F];
type Kind2<F extends URIS2, A, B> = URItoKind2<A, B>[F];
```

And now we can return to our theoretical `Collection` above and implement it using kinds.
Three dots `...` syntax here is array/object spread operator.
Here in array we simply copy the array `c` and add value `v` to it.
And in object you are able to copy all property values from the old object and change some of them by specifying only the ones you need.

```typescript
type Collection<F extends URIS> = {
  create: <A>() => Kind<F, A>;
  insert: <A>(v: A, c: Kind<F, A>) => Kind<F, A>;
}

const collectionArray: Collection<"Array"> = {
  create: () => [],
  insert: (v, c) => [...c, v]
};
```

And it is how type classes will look in TypeScript.
We represent them as a dictionary of related methods carried in a mere type.

> Our `Collection` is a type class which work with one arity constructors which we defined in `URItoKind`.

Reviewer 2: Formally it is not a type class, it is a type. I would say 

```suggestion
Our `Collection` is sort of a type class which work with one arity constructors which we defined in `URItoKind`.
```

or

```suggestion
Our `Collection` is effectively a type class which work with one arity constructors which we defined in `URItoKind`.
```

### Algebraic data types

In Haskell, [algebraic data types (ADTs)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UqwLn2OyQ_E) are a commonly used functionality of the language.
They allow you to build your own types from small blocks.
And with pattern matching, it is easy to access this data.

Unfortunately, you can't build an ADT in TypeScript the same way as in Haskell, but we will show you what you can do with the existing type system. 
We will start with the easiest enums and move to more complex things after that.

#### Union types

Union types allow you to combine different types.
Unions are not tagged, so they are just a set of possible types.

```typescript
type Result = string | number | (() => string);
```

If you fail to match a type in the union, the compiler knows that it will not be present in the future.

In the first `if`, we pass `typeof result === "number"`, so we know that it may be only `function` or `string` in the code below.
And we can run `length.toString()` on this value (even if `number` doesn't have such a property) since both `function` and `string` have the property `length`.

> But we can't `call` this value because `string` is not callable. 

Reviewer 3: But can we call it, if all constituents of the union are callable? Will it infer the result to be union of function result types?

Author: Yes, added note

We can do it only after failing to match `string`.

```typescript
const resultInterpreter = (result: Result): string | undefined => {

>   if (typeof result === "number") {

Reviewer 3: So, `if` statement is enriched with case analysis, when is used with `typeof result === "number"`.

Will `typeof result === "number" || typeof result === "string"` do the trick, leaving type to be `function` in `else`-block?

Author: Yes, added note

  switch (result.type) {
    case "error":
      return result.message;
    case "result":
      return `valid ${result.value.toString()}`;
    default:
      return "impossible";
  }
};
```

By using type parameters, you can also make more complex things like [this library](https://github.com/pfgray/ts-adt) for ADTs.

#### Pattern matching

One of the most valuable features of Haskell that is connected with ADTs is [pattern matching](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pattern_matching), which allows you to write code branches based on the structure of values. 
There is [no such built-in functionality](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-pattern-matching) in TypeScript yet, but you can use [ts-pattern](https://github.com/gvergnaud/ts-pattern).

Here's an example from the repository:

```typescript
type Data =
  | { type: 'text'; content: string }
  | { type: 'img'; src: string };

type Result =
  | { type: 'ok'; data: Data }
  | { type: 'error'; error: Error };

const result: Result = ...;

return match(result)
  .with({ type: 'error' }, (res) => `<p>Oups! An error occured</p>`)
  .with({ type: 'ok', data: { type: 'text' } }, (res) => `<p>${res.data.content}</p>`)

>   .with({ type: 'ok', data: { type: 'img', src: select() } }, (src) => `<img src=${src} />`)

Reviewer 3: Is the rule "`res` is the matched payload _or_ arguments are the ones chosen with `select()`"?

Author: Looks like yes, but `ts-pattern` have a lot of things, it is a simple example just for design understanding

The first one is used to prevent variable reference change.

```typescript
const a = 1;
a = 2; // Error: Cannot assign to 'a' because it is a constant.
```

And the second one is used to make properties immutable.

```typescript
type A = {
  readonly x: number;
}
const a: A = { x: 1 };
a.x = 12; // Error: Cannot assign to 'x' because it is a read-only property.
```

Nevertheless, there are some problems here.

`const` and `readonly` only block reference changes but do nothing about values.
With `const a = [1, 2, 3]` or `readonly x: number[]`, you can still change the contents of an array.

Also, you need to be careful when passing an object with read-only fields to a function because it may be changed inside the function.
This happens because of information loss.
The type of an object with `readonly` is a subtype of the type without it, and when you pass it to a function with a more general type, the function does not have access to information about its subtype.

```typescript
const a: { readonly x: number } = { x: 1 };

const changeA = (arg: { x: number }): void => {
  const argC = arg;
  argC.x = 2;
}

changeA(a);
a.x; // 2
```

> For this reason, you should always write proper types of arguments.

Reviewer 3: What do you mean?

Author: I think it was moved here by mistake

Although you can now make immutable objects, usually you don't need them as they are.
You want to do some actions on them and make new immutable objects.
To do that, you can construct new objects by hand or use the `Writable` utility type, but it is not that simple.

Fortunately, there are libraries that can help you deal with this issue.

The most powerful is [immer](https://immerjs.github.io/immer/), which is used for immutable state flow.
Immutable data there is not copied but shared in memory.
In other words, `immer` gives you the ability to work with a draft copy of your data and not worry about mutability.
After all the changes are done, it will produce an actually immutable state.
It also has helpers for React.

Here's an example of its use:

```typescript
type A = Immutable<
  {
    text: string;
    valid: boolean;
  }[]
>;

const a: A = [
  {
    text: "valid text",
    valid: true,
  },
  {
    text: "invalid text",
    valid: false,
  },
];

const nextA = produce(a, (draft) => {
  draft[1].valid = false;  // set valid = false for the second element
  draft.push({ text: "some text", valid: false }); // add new element to array
});
```

> In the code example above, `produce` is a base primitive for working with `immer`.

Reviewer 3: Does it remove all `readonly`-limitations from type of `a` via `Writable<>`?

Author: I don't really know how it works under the hood, but what for it may need `Writable`? Search in their repo by `Writable` said that there is no `Writable`

  return (s: number) => {
    return s.toString() === x;
  };
};

f("5")(5) // true;
```

As you may see in the last example, we can call the function `f` and return a function that takes another argument.
It's definitely possible to implement some kind of currying through this.

You can split the type signature of the function from its implementation.
Unfortunately, unnamed parameters are not supported, but you can set them as `_`.

```typescript
type addT = (_: number) => (_: number) => number;
const add: addT = (l) => (r) => l + r;

type foldArrT = (_: (_: number) => (_: number) => number) => (_: number) => (_: number[]) => number;
const foldArr: foldArrT = (f) => (z) => (arr) => {
  let m = z;
  arr.forEach((elem) => {
    m = f(m)(elem);
  });
  return m;
};

foldArr(add)(0)([1, 2, 3, 4, 5]) // 15;
```

The syntax is weird since you always need to use named parameters.
But it is still possible, and you can use it in your code quite easily.

### Polymorphism

There are different kinds of polymorphisms, but we will cover only three of them: parametric, ad-hoc, and row polymorphism.

Let's start with the first one.

#### Parametric polymorphism

> Parametric polymorphism allows us to write abstract functions or data types that don't depend on their type.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Parametric polymorphism allows us to write abstract functions that, for instance, don't depend on concrete types of particular arguments, and types that can abstract out parts of itself as type parameters.
```

  interpret: A;
};

type ToS<A> = {
  toString: string;
};

declare module "fp-ts/lib/HKT" {
  interface URItoKind<A> {
    readonly Interpreter: Interpreter<A>;
    readonly ToS: ToS<A>;
  }
}
```

After all the preparations, we are ready to create instances.

```typescript
const arithInterpreter: ArithExpr<"Interpreter"> = {
  num: (v: number) => {
    return { interpret: v };
  },
  plus: (l: Interpreter<number>, r: Interpreter<number>) => {
    return { interpret: l.interpret + r.interpret };
  },
  gt: (l: Interpreter<number>, r: Interpreter<number>) => {
    return { interpret: l.interpret > r.interpret };
  },
  and: (l: Interpreter<boolean>, r: Interpreter<boolean>) => {
    return { interpret: l.interpret && r.interpret };
  },
};

const arithToS: ArithExpr<"ToS"> = {
  num: (v: number) => {
    return { toString: v.toString() };
  },
  plus: (l: ToS<number>, r: ToS<number>) => {
    return { toString: `(${l.toString} + ${r.toString})` };
  },
  gt: (l: ToS<number>, r: ToS<number>) => {
    return { toString: `(${l.toString} > ${r.toString})` };
  },
  and: (l: ToS<boolean>, r: ToS<boolean>) => {
    return { toString: `(${l.toString} && ${r.toString})` };
  },

> };

Reviewer 3: My wild guess is that `"ToS"` here is a marker or has the same role as
```
instance IsExpr ToS where
```
in haskell.

Author: If I understand you right the answer is yes \
I don't really like how it looks, but I wanted to make it looks like in haskell and didn't want to invent more complex examples as it is already complex enough. So, I thought a lot about it and as it is kind of advanced part I think we can leave it like this

# TypeScript for Haskellers

> Web app nowadays is mandatory part of every modern application.

Reviewer: This is a bit too much water: the question here is why Haskellers would be interested in TypeScript.

Reviewer: Additionally: could you drop a link to our Typescript article somewhere in the body (https://serokell.io/blog/why-typescript). This is for SEO reasons, but I am quite sure a good spot can be found.

Author: >This is a bit too much water

Yes, started it as I usually do my university docs) Will fix

It doesn't matter how small or complex it is.
From one click apps with pictures converting to photoshop everyone wants fast and easy access to it and Web is where you can give it to your users or even for you with the easiest way.

> 

Reviewer 2: In some projects, we had a practice that no documentation should be published unless verified with some spellchecker. I also tried to follow it for blog posts, and believe it saved a considerable amount of time.

So I'd really recommend registering in e.g. https://grammarly.com and making the pass over the full text there.

> Moreover, UI and UX standards are increasing.

Reviewer 3: _Raising_ or _improving_

> People like simple interfaces with enjoyable.

Reviewer 3: with joy

Application with worse functionality and better UI/UX may win on the market against the other one with bad design.

One might say that doesn't matter what your application is about or what part of it you write.

> In the end in most of the cases you will need to give access for it to smb.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the end you'll have to give access for it to somebody other.
```

Reviewer 3: I suggest replacing dot with comma and gluing the next sentence.

Whether it is an external user or your colleague using internal products.

> So, in Serokell we use TypeScript for writing web pages.

Reviewer 3: > So

This implies that you explained why the TypeScript is an only choice, which haven't really happened.

```suggestion
In Serokell, we use TypeScript for writing web pages.
```

And as our main language is Haskell, in this article we want to explain how knowledge from it will help you to write TypeScript code.

## Why TypeScript?

Basically our Web world consists of 3 things: HTML, CSS, and JavaScript.
The first one is about content, the second one about this content style and the last one about how you can interact with this content.
Moreover, these 3 things are just files, and you need a way to read and show them.
That is what browsers do.

> Historically this set of files was perfect to write web pages.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Historically, this set of files was perfect to write web pages.
```

> And because of the enormous growth of the web JavaScript in particular has grown enormous as well.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
And because of the enormous growth of the web, JavaScript in particular has grown enormous as well.
```

So, as a result any new language which allow you to write web applications translate its code to JavaScript.
And there are a lot of such languages and language extensions: TypeScript, Kotlin JS, CoffeeScript, Scala JS, Babel, ClojureScript, etc.
Generally you can write web applications almost on every language.

> As we like Haskell, maybe we can write our Web application on functional languages or even on Haskell? And the answer is yes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Because we like Haskell, maybe we can write our Web application on functional languages or even on Haskell? And the answer is yes.
```

There is strongly-typed PureScript with Haskell like syntax, purely functional Elm, Reflex framework for Haskell with GHCJS, F# with Fabel.

But when we use Haskell we know that people like it and customers want it, and we can't say the same thing about technologies above.

> Customers will be locked in this solution as most likely they will not be able to maintenance such application by themselves.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Customers will be locked in this solution because most likely they will not be able to maintain such an application by themselves.
```

> On our side we will be locked in using JS libraries which number is enormous, build problems, and fast team expanding.

Reviewer 3: > JS libraries which number is enormous

Wut? I thought the current case is the "GHCJS" one, because

> Customers will be locked in this solution as most likely they will not be able to maintenance such application by themselves.

Author: Okay, maybe I am not right, but for example. Smb wrote JS library yesterday. Am I able to use it with GHCJS?

Thus, we needed a language which will easy support all modern technologies from web development, big community, and give us a possibility to use our knowledge from Haskell.
And here it is -- TypeScript.
It is static typing language which popularity grows from year to year.

> A lot of new libraries are writen on it, a lot of have type declarations, and it provides an easy way to use plain JS libraries as well.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A lot of new libraries are writen on it or have type declarations, and TypeScript provides an easy way to use plain JS libraries as well.
```

Now it is time to see how your Haskell experience may help you in learning TypeScript and how you can improve your code with it.

In this article we don't have a goal to cover all similarities or differences.
We also will not say about disadvantages of TypeScript type system against Haskell or how it works under the hood.
Our goal is to show what and how you can use types in TypeScript.

> ## Similar concepts

Reviewer: Since we have a section about similar concepts, perhaps there are some unsimilar pitfalls that Haskell developers might fall into? 

It would be a nice "mirror section" for this one.

Author: Hm, I think I should just somehow rename the section as all article is about `Similar concepts` but this part is just about easiest things

> It would be a nice "mirror section" for this one

I didn't want to mention them because in this case it will become a TypeScript guide but not a brief introduction to types in it. I also didn't want to describe all code and how it work, only examples, so that reader may go and google it and find more examples.

Unlike Haskell in TypeScript types are not the center part of the language.

> They just help programmers to write more strict and understandable code, making their life easier.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
They just help programmers to write stricter and more understandable code, making their life easier.
```

You can use types like `any` and nobody pushes you into strict frames.

> So, this part will be about simple build in concepts which are familiar for haskellers and which do not require any overheads on writing code.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
So, this part will be about simple built-in concepts which are familiar for haskellers and do not require any overheads on writing code.
```

> Nevertheless, we will also leave links for some more complex libraries and articles which may help you or deeply investigate the theme.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Nevertheless, we will also leave links for some more complex libraries and articles which may help you investigate the case even deeper.
```

### Strictness

> The first thing you need to know is that TypeScript was developed to provide an ability for JavaScript developers using it.

Reviewer 3: Не понимат

So, by default TypeScript is really polite in using types.
Nevertheless, with bunch or compiler options you can make it more strict in types and other things.

> So, the main strict compiler option is which you need to add to your `tsconfig.json` file is `strict`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
So, the main compiler option is which you need to add to your `tsconfig.json` file is `strict`.
```

> It will enable all strict related flags for you and if in future smth will be added to strict options list you will not need to add it manually.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It will enable all strictness-related flags for you and if in future something will be added to strict options list you will not need to add it manually.
```
Smone usd smth in artcl, plz dn't.

> But if you want to specify them here are all options: alwaysStrict, strictNullChecks, strictBindCallApply, strictFunctionTypes, strictPropertyInitialization, noImplicitAny, noImplicitThis, useUnknownInCatchVariables.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
But in case you want to specify them all, here you are: alwaysStrict, strictNullChecks, strictBindCallApply, strictFunctionTypes, strictPropertyInitialization, noImplicitAny, noImplicitThis, useUnknownInCatchVariables.
```

### Type aliases and newtypes

> Type aliases works exactly the same as in Haskell.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Type aliases works exactly like they do in Haskell -
```

> You can create a new name to refer to some type.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
you can create a new name to refer to some type.
```

```typescript
type Email = string;

type Document<T> = {
  name: string;
  athor?: string;
  data: T;
}
```

> Creating newtype is not so trivial.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Creating a `newtype` is not so trivial.
```

There is no such analog in TypeScript, but you can do it using tags.

```typescript
type Email = string & { readonly __tag: unique symbol };
type City = string & { readonly __tag: unique symbol };

function sendMessage(email: Email);

// type error
sendMessage("message");
sendMessage("St. Petersburg" as City);

// valid
sendMessage("email@gmail.com" as Email);
```

> Anyway this is not an ideal solution for newtypes but there is a [comment](https://github.com/Microsoft/TypeScript/issues/4895#issuecomment-401067935) in issue with a better solution and there is also a [library](https://github.com/sveseme/taghiro) which implement it to a nice view.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Anyway, this is not an ideal solution for newtypes but there is a [comment](https://github.com/Microsoft/TypeScript/issues/4895#issuecomment-401067935) in issue with a better solution and there is also a [library](https://github.com/sveseme/taghiro) which implement it to a nice view.
```

Reviewer 3: > implement it to a nice view.

:cho:

### Unit types, Unions, Data types and Pattern Matching

> Haskell ADT is a constantly used functionality of language.

Reviewer 3: s/./, and/

It allows you to build your own big types from small blocks.
And with pattern matching it is easy to get access to this data.

Unfortunately there is no same way to build ADT, but we will start from the easiest enums and move to the more complex things showing what we can do using existing type system in TypeScript.

Unit types are subtypes of primitive types that contain exactly one primitive value.
You can use it like enums setting unique string values.
Or even use different values types.

```typescript
type Result = true | "error" | 5;

const resultInterpreter = (result: Result): string => {
  if (result === true) {
    return "true";
  }
  if (result === "error") {
    return result;
  }
  return "five";
};
```

Moving forward the next is feature Unions.
Unions are not tagged, so it is just a condition of possible types.

```typescript

> type Result = string | number | (() => string);

Reviewer 2: At this point I wonder, whether can I mix unit and union types, e.g.

```ts
type Ty = string | false
```

and if no, why can it be made this way (if there is a short explanation).

Author: Yes, you can

const resultInterpreter = (result: Result): string | undefined => {
  if (typeof arg === "string") {
    return "error";
  } else if (typeof n === "number") {
    return "valid";
  } else if (typeof arg === "function") {
    return undefined;
  }
}

> ```

Reviewer 2: IMO It is important to demonstrate somewhere soon, that TS compiler can into exhaustiveness check, that for `if (typeof arg === "string")` in `else` branch the compiler already knows that `arg` cannot be `string`. Overwise the whole story about TS's type-system stops making much sense.

Also, where `arg` and `n` variables came from? :eyes:

> Going deeper using Unions it is possible to construct data type analog.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Going deeper using Unions, it is possible to construct data type analog.
```

It is called discriminated Unions.
The idea is to store special property for each variant which will allow switching on it.

```typescript
type Result = 
  | {type: "error"; message: string}
  | {type: "result"; value: number}

const resultInterpreter = (result: Result): string => {
  switch (result.type) {
    case "error":
      return result.message;
    case "result":
      return `valid ${result.value.toString()}`;
    default:

>       return "impossible";

Reviewer 2: It looks suspicious to me that the compiler does not consider `default` case as impossible :thinking:

Author: Hm, I think the answer here is that TypeScript has type `never` and the last case here is with the type `never`. There is also a rule `default-case` about always enable default case and it case of enabling error on impossible `default` case they will conflict. So, if you will read some issues answers in their github you will see that they usually don't like popular ideas

Reviewer 2: Hah, nice

  }
};
```

This is the very simple examples of working with ADT like structures in TypeScript.
Using type parameters you are also able to make some more complex things like [such](https://github.com/pfgray/ts-adt) library for ADTs.
But one of the most useful features of Haskell connected with ADTs is pattern matching.
In allows you to disclose you structure comparing it with some pattern and based on this condition execute some code.
There is [no such functionality](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-pattern-matching) in TypeScript but [ts-pattern](https://github.com/gvergnaud/ts-pattern) will bring it to you.
Example from repository:

```typescript
type Data =
  | { type: 'text'; content: string }
  | { type: 'img'; src: string };

type Result =
  | { type: 'ok'; data: Data }
  | { type: 'error'; error: Error };

const result: Result = ...;

return match(result)
  .with({ type: 'error' }, (res) => `<p>Oups! An error occured</p>`)
  .with({ type: 'ok', data: { type: 'text' } }, (res) => `<p>${res.data.content}</p>`)
  .with({ type: 'ok', data: { type: 'img', src: select() } }, (src) => `<img src=${src} />`)
  .exhaustive();

> ```

Reviewer 2: :pog: Looks interesting

Reviewer 3: Looks like something that eats stack.

### Immutability

TypeScript has two base primitives to work with immutability: const and readonly.
The first one is used to prevent variable reference change.
And the second one for properties immutability.

```typescript
const a = 1;
a = 2; // error

interface A {
  readonly x: number;
}
const a: A = { x: 1 };
a.x = 12; // error
```

Nevertheless, you can easily see problems here.
Const and readonly only block the reference change, but make nothing about values.
With `const a = [1, 2, 3]` or `readonly x: number[]` you still will be able to change the content of array.
Let's introduce more cases and how you can deal with them in TypeScript.

```typescript
type A = {
  x: number;
  y: number;
};

type ImmutableA = Readonly<A>; 
const a: ImmutableA = { x: 1, y: 2 };
a.x = 2; // error
a.y = 1; // error

const arr: ReadonlyArray<number> = [1, 2, 3];
arr[0] = 4; // error

interface A {
    readonly [x: string]: number;
};

const a: A = { "x": 1, "y": 2 };
a["x"] = 2; // error
a["y"] = 1; // error
```

> Also be careful passing object with readonly fields to function as it may cause unexpected behaviour.

Reviewer 2: I would say it more clearly, that the passed object can be changed inside (I personally would expect the call to fail, hilarious).

If it is possible to make the text simultaneously short and self-contained (leaving code snippets as an optional extra to read), I think this should be done.

Author: As I understand that is because of scope and that is a problem. So, function know nothing about `arg` type beyond itself. It know only that `arg: { x: number }`. But maybe not, will try to understand it more

Reviewer 3: If `readonly` is a part of the type, `{readonly x : A}` should be a subtype of `{x : A}` and therefore latter should be prohibited when expecting former.

```typescript
const a: { readonly x: number } = { x: 1 };

const changeA = (arg: { x: number }): void => {
  const argC = arg;
  argC.x = 2;
}

changeA(a);

> console.log(a.x); // 2

Reviewer 3: Noice.

```

Now you get more flexible way to make things readonly.
Although now you can get immutable objects usually you don't need them as is.
You want to make some actions on them and make new immutable objects.
But it is not so easy.
You will need to construct new objects by hands, you can also use `Writable` utility type, but it still is not really simple to copy and construct new objects.

Let's introduce some libraries which may help you deal with this issue.
The first one and the most powerful is [immer](https://immerjs.github.io/immer/).
It is used for immutable state flow.
Immutable data is not copied but shared in memory.
It also has helpers for React.

```typescript
type A = Immutable<
  {
    text: string;
    valid: boolean;
  }[]
>;

const a: A = [
  {
    text: "valid text",
    valid: true,
  },
  {
    text: "invalid text",
    valid: false,
  },
];

const nextA = produce(a, (draft) => {
  draft[1].valid = false;

>   draft.push({ text: "some text", valid: false });

Reviewer 2: Spent 30secs figuring out, what can `push` mean as a lens-like operation, before remembering that it is an Array built-in function. Would like to see a comment here, many Haskellers may not know JavaScript at all :stuck_out_tongue_closed_eyes:

Reviewer 3: How can you _`push()`_ and _assign_ into an immutable `A = Immutable<_>`? Ah, so the `produce` lowers the immutability for a callback? Plz add that as a comment.

Reviewer 2: AFAIG `product` creates a partial clone with the following changes applied, the old value is left intact. Is that right?

Author: >AFAIG product creates a partial clone with the following changes applied, the old value is left intact. Is that right?

During my research I saw great explanation about `immer` implementation under the hood. But now I can't find it. So, yes, I think on high level this answer is correct (it is what we can know from their docs)

});
```

And finally there are three more interesting libraries for working with immutable structures which may be more familiar for Haskell devs: [partial.lenses](https://github.com/calmm-js/partial.lenses), [monocle-ts](https://github.com/gcanti/monocle-ts), and [optics-ts](https://github.com/akheron/optics-ts).
These are optics libraries.
Unfortunately the first one doesn't have type bindings.
The second one support TypeScript and is a partial porting of Scala monocle.
And the last one is the newest and TypeScript oriented optics library.

### High Order functions and Currying

A lot of languages support High Order functions and TypeScript is not an exception.
You can use functions as an argument and also return them.

```typescript
const filterArray = (fn: (elem: string) => boolean, arr: string[]): string[] => {
  const newArray: string[] = [];
  for (let i = 0; i < arr.length; i++) {
    if (fn(arr[i])) {
      newArray.push(arr[i]);
    }
  }
  return newArray; // or just simple return arr.filter(fn);
};

> const f = (x: string): ((s: number) => boolean) => {

Reviewer 3: What happens if a parameter name in type and in actual returned function diverge?

Author: Nothing) \
Parameter names in types are only needed for, hm, nothing and it is just impossible to not write them \
You can define your function like 
```typescript
const f: (_: number) => string = (x) => {
  return x.toString();
};

const g = (x: number): string => {
  return x.toString();
};

function h(x: number): string {
  return x.toString();
}
```
In the first case you just write the type and then implementation. In the second and third ones parameters and their types are combined. In the example you mentioned the return type is just type and we can simply write `const f = (x: string): ((_: number) => boolean) => {`

Author: If you want smth like real names you need to write smth like
```typescript
const f = (x: string): ((_: { s: number }) => boolean) => {
  return ({ s }: { s: number }) => {
    return s.toString() === x;
  };
};
```

  return (s: number) => {
    return s.toString() === x;
  };
};

> f("5")(5);

Reviewer 2: Here and further, could you also mention (e.g. in comments) what is returned/outputed by the call?

```

As you may see in the last example, we can call function `f` and return function from it, applying in for the new argument.
So, yes, we can implement some king of currying using it.

```typescript

> type addT = (_: number) => (_: number) => number;

Reviewer 3: Can we do a parametrised type alias?

like
```ts
type curried<A, B, C> = (_: A) => (_: B) => C
```

Author: Yes, there are examples below

const add: addT = (l) => (r) => l + r;

> type foldArrT = (f: (_: number) => (_: number) => number) => (_: number) => (_: number[]) => number;

Reviewer 3: This thing also screams "add type parameters to me", because it will work for any array, not just for `number[]`.

Author: Yes, but only on the next step we say about `Polymorphism`. I can just swap this two parts, but not sure that it will be better

const foldArr: foldArrT = (f) => (z) => (arr) => {
  let m = z;
  arr.forEach((elem) => {
    m = f(m)(elem);
  });
  return m;
};

foldArr(add)(0)([1, 2, 3, 4, 5]);
```

Unfortunately syntax is weird as you need to always use named parameters.
But it is still a possible functionality, and you can simply use it in your code.

### Polymorphism

> There are different polymorphisms, but we will say only about thee of them: Parametric, Ad hoc, and Row.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There are different polymorphisms, but we will say only about thee of them: Parametric, Ad-hoc one and Row one.
```

> Let's start from the first on.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Let's start from the first one.
```

Parametric polymorphism allows us to write abstract function or data which will not depend on its type.
In TypeScript, it is called generics.

```typescript
const arrLength: <T>(_: T[]) => number = (arr) => arr.length;

arrLength<number>([1, 2, 3]);

> arrLength<string>(["1", "2", "3"]);

Reviewer 2: It becomes harder to understand what's going on. E.g. what `arrLength` returns (type or value?), where can I use it?

Reviewer 3: Is it necessary to write the type each time you use the function? If not, please add an example.

Author: >It becomes harder to understand what's going on. E.g. what arrLength returns (type or value?), where can I use it?

Hm, in the previous part about `currying` there was an example `add: addT`. It show how we can split type and implementation and also the syntax. \
So this is like 
```haskell
arrLength :: [a] -> Int
arrLength l = length l
```
But written smth like `arrLength :: [a] -> Int = l -> length l` (It is funny that students on Haskell course were asking about such syntax) \

> where can I use it

Everywhere? It is just a function (maybe not really useful)

type NonEmpty<T> = {
  head: T;
  tail: T[];
};
```

Ad hoc polymorphism allows you to implement abstract functions, which logic will be different with different types.

```typescript
interface Eq<T> {
  equal: (f: T, s: T) => boolean;
}

class IntEq implements Eq<number> {
  equal(f: number, s: number) {
    return f === s;
  }
}

class IntArrEq implements Eq<number[]> {
  equal(f: number[], s: number[]) {
    return f.filter(item => s.indexOf(item) < 0).length === 0;
  }

> }

Reviewer 2: In real life, it is a bit dangerous to define `equal` that is not symmetric, but if you like this example then fine.

I would only reflect this behavriour in the class name somehow, maybe call it `IntArrSubset`?

const lookup = <T, K extends Eq<T>, V>(cmp: K, k: T, mp: [T, V][]): V | undefined => {
  let result: V | undefined;
  mp.forEach(([kk, v]) => {
    if (cmp.equal(k, kk)) {
      result = v;
    }

>   });

Reviewer 2: In this particular case, is that true that you could go without the `result` variable and just do `return v` when the value is found?

Author: `return` in `foreach` make nothing, just didn't want to use `for`, but I will try to make a better example

Reviewer 3: I'd make it via `Array#reduce`. @Martoon-00, the `return` will just exit the `forEach`'s lambda.

Reviewer 2: Ah right, fair enough.

  return result;
};

lookup(new IntEq(), 1, [[1, "2"], [2, "1"]]);

lookup(new IntArrEq(), [1, 2, 3], [[[1, 3], "1"], [[3, 2], "2"], [[2, 1, 3], "3"]]);
```

> One more polymorphism is row.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Another kind of polymorphism is row one.
```

Reviewer 3: I think all three kinds of polymorphism should get their subheaders.

Author: You mean in `Polymorphism` header or remove `Polymorphism` and add three new headers?

> It allows you to abstract by the record fields and allow only those of them which have such fields.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It allows you to make sure that the record contains at least given set of fields.
```

> Unfortunately TypeScript type compatibility is based on structural subtyping, and it is not a row polymorphism.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Unfortunately TypeScript type compatibility is based on structural subtyping, so what we have available it is not _really_ a row polymorphism.
```

Despite this we can use intersection types to emulate this.

> But you should be careful with using it because subtyping cause information loss as if you have value `a: T` and `b: T & {x: number}` you will be able to do `a = b` and cut off `b` to `T`.

Reviewer 2: The example is too concrete and complex IMO, hard to grasp. I would just say that additional information can be lost during assignments, the developer must be cautious to propagate the full type-level information when they need it.

Reviewer 3: Wait, the `a = b` is a reference assignment, the `b` will still be `T & {x: number}` internally, it will only appear `T`, won't it?

Author: > Wait, the a = b is a reference assignment, the b will still be T & {x: number} internally, it will only appear T, won't it?

So, yes, but compiler will not allow you to call `x`

```typescript
type fnT = <T>(v: T & { x: number }) => T & { x: number }

> // You should fully describe all types to not lose information.

Reviewer 3: In Elm for instance, you can (or was able to) write a `{x : Int | t} -> t` function and it will not compose with itself as well. I would not say that this is information loss, but rather a chosen level of abstraction. Sometimes you _need_ to forget something - or outright remove a field.

Author: I think in `Elm` you just can't return `x` from the function with type `{x : Int | t} -> t` \
I mean you can't write such thing
```elm
type alias A =
  { x : Int
  , y : Int
  }

type alias B t = {t | x : Int}
  
f : B t -> t
f a = a
```

But in TS it is possible
```typescript
type A = { x: number; y: number };

type B<T> = T & { x: number };

const f: <T>(a: B<T>) => T = (a) => a;
```
So, in case of `Elm` yes, we want to remove field `x` as if we will not remove it compiler will say about it to us. But in case of TS it will say nothing.

Author: >remove a field

Moreover it will not remove it at all but only on type level.
```
type A = {};
type B = A & { x: number };

let a: A = {};
const b: B = { x: 1 };
a = b;
console.log(JSON.stringify(a)); // {"x":1}
```

Author: So, I think `const f: <T>(a: B<T>) => T = (a) => a;` may cause bugs and you should `fully describe all types to not lose information`

Author: >fully describe all types

I think it is the biggest problem with TS when you try to go a little bit deeper. Compiler will help you only if you will help him

type A = {};
type B = A & {x: number};

let a: A = {};
const b: B = {x: 1};
a = b;

> console.log(a.x); // Property 'x' does not exist on type 'A'.

Reviewer 2: Is `Property 'x' does not exist on type 'A'.` the outputted text or compile-time error? If it is the latter, I would simplify to `const c = a.x` to make it clearer.

Reviewer 3: :cho:

```

> ### Mapped types, Conditional types and Type families

Reviewer 2: Here some advanced stuff comes in, maybe leave it for the second part of the article? I believe, at this moment the reader must have a plenty of thoughts to digest, so it could make sense to wrap up and say that more interesting things like mapped types, peano numbers and others will be considered in the next article.

@NaeosPsy What do you think?

Reviewer: I think that it can definitely be in one article, as long as easier things are first -- the person will read the start, hit a wall, and bookmark the article for re-read later.

Reviewer 2: Okay, I'll review the remaining part a bit later then.

One useful type functionality of TypeScript are Mapped and Conditional types.
They give us really flexible ability to modify existing types or create now one.

Mapped types allows you to create new types based on old types transforming them in some way.
The syntax looks like `[set of field names]: type;`.
For example, you can add optional modifier or readonly modifier to each field with `type Partial<T> = { [P in keyof T]?: T[P] }` and `type Readonly<T> = { readonly [P in keyof T]: T[P] }`.

> It is also possible to remove such modifiers using `-?` and `-readonly`.

Reviewer 3: Please provide examples of that.

Let's present some examples of mapped types usage.

```typescript

> const sym: unique symbol = Symbol();

Reviewer 3: Wait, what's `unique`?

type Point = {
  x: number;
  y: number;

>   [sym]: string;

Reviewer 3: The usage of symbols as _computed names_ and the whole _computed name_ concept should be described beforehand. When I first found I can do `{[x + "1"] : "a"}` in JS I was like _NANI?!_ for 20 minutes or so.

This is a very alien thing to have a computed field in what appears to be a record. For me, at least.

Author: Okay, I added symbols just to not write comments, but as I already started doing it I will simply remove them. I think computed names part is not for this article.

Author: > computed names part is not for this article

Okay, `[P in keyof T]?: T[P]` is already computed names 🤔 \
Do we really need a part about them?

  0: string;
}

> type Pick<T, K extends keyof T> = {

Reviewer 3: This thing should also have a "here we..." explanation above it. I tried to understand what is it and I got lost.

  [P in K]: T[P];
};

type PointValues = Pick<Point, "x" | "y" | 0> // type PointValues = { x: number; y: number; 0: number }

type Getter<T extends string> = `get${Capitalize<T>}`;
type Getters<T> = {

>     [K in keyof T as Getter<Extract<K, string>>]: () => T[K];

Reviewer 3: _Magic intensifies_

Reviewer 3: What's the semantic of `in`, `keyof` and `as` in types? Please describe beforehand. Okay, for `in` (subtyping) and `keyof` (javascript) it is kinda obvious. But `as`?

Reviewer 3: After some thought I got that it is a "mapped type", but please explain, because if I was reading this not for a review, I'd "okay, I'm out, `Ctrl-W`" at least here. Like "using `as` we can do ... and here ls an example".

}

type PointGetters = Getters<Point> // type PointValues = { getX: number; getY: number; }
```

Another great feature is conditional types.
It allows you to choose the type based on some condition expressed as another type.

> Using `extends` word you are able to make a condition `T extends U ? X : Y`.

Reviewer 3: What's the priority of `extends` and `?:` operators?

Author: Does it really matter? (I just can't find this information 🙂)

It also allows you to not only choose from two types, but from many types `T extends U ? X : T extends W ? Y : Z`.
With such functionality you may implement things which may resemble type families although not quite right.
Anyway in conjunction with mapped types it is a great feature to manage your types.

```typescript
// never type describe the type of values that never present
type Exclude<T, U> = T extends U ? never : T;

type Omit<T, K> = Pick<T, Exclude<keyof T, K>>;

type Point = {
  x: number;
  y: number;
  z: number;
}

> type PointX = Omit<Point, "y" | "z">; // type PointX = { x: number }

Reviewer 3: What exactly are we trying to do in this code block? I got that the `never` is a lower boundary of a type lattice :peka:, but I can't understand that the code is doing, so it need an explanation: "here we have a type `Point`, but we want `X`, so we use `Y` to ... and `Z` to ...".

Reviewer: I think it would be simpler to write PointNotYZ or smth like that. 

Or just make a code sample with Point2D and Omit z

```

TypeScript [contains](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/utility-types.html) a lot of predefined conditional and mapped types, so you can use them from the box.

## Going deeper

> Build in concepts are good.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Built-in concepts are good.
```

> But as you already saw TypeScript type system is not really weak.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
But as you can see, TypeScript type system is not really a weak one.
```

Reviewer 3: It is rather intimidatingly flexible.

Adding our knowledge from Haskell and type theory we can think about how to get more from this system and what we can build using it.
This part will show very brief descriptions of different approaches.

> But links on references and other articles must help you to deeply understand them.

Reviewer 3: :cho:

Maybe I don't get it, but this sentence doesn't tell where the links _are_.

### HKT

You may see that TypeScript type system is not so bad as one may think.

> But it has one important limitation -- absence of kinds.

Reviewer 3: _And absence of_ soundness, _but okay._

> Higher-Kinded Types allow us to write types which have their own type constructors.

Reviewer 3: I'd call that "higher-order functions _over types_". The term "type constructor", I believe, got a bit outdated. And `type List<A>` is a type constructor already, with no HKT.

Or "allow types to be parametrized by other parametrized types".

or
```suggestion
Higher-Kinded Types allow us to write types which have their own type constructors as parameters.
```

So, using generics instead of abstracting only over types we are able to abstract over types which already abstract over types.

```typescript
interface Collection<F> {

>   create: <A>() => F<A>; // Type 'F' is not generic.

Reviewer 3: Can we abstract over generics or not? The paragraph above say we can't, but the code says we can. Does this code work? If yes, what happens if we do `Collection<number>`? If not, what is the compiler error? The comment `Type 'F' is not generic.` is very misleading.

Author: >The comment Type 'F' is not generic. is very misleading.

It is compiler error)

  insert: <A>(v: A) => (c: F<A>) => F<A>; // Type 'F' is not generic.
}

const collectionArray: Collection<Array> = {
  create: () => [],
  insert: (v) => (c: number[]) => [...c, v]
};
```

> Fortunately we are able to simulate kinds using denationalization which allows us to translate higher-order programs into a first-order language.

Reviewer 3: > [denationalization](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/ru/%D1%81%D0%BB%D0%BE%D0%B2%D0%B0%D1%80%D1%8C/%D0%B0%D0%BD%D0%B3%D0%BB%D0%B8%D0%B9%D1%81%D0%BA%D0%B8%D0%B9/denationalization)

Please don't invoke political operators :D

Defunctionalisation, perhaps?

Author: Oru, macbook touchbar just suggested this word I think)))

The main idea is to map type constructors names to their implementations.
Using it we will be able to write type Kind which work with `* -> *` constructors, Kind2 for `* -> * -> *`, and so on.

```typescript
interface URItoKind<A> {
  'Array': Array<A>;
}

interface URItoKind2<A, B> {

>   'Map': Map<A, B>;

Reviewer 3: So, it is a _closed_ relation? I assume we can't add type constructors to the system to be recognised by the defunctionaliser.

Author: Hm, you mean if it is possible to create our own type and add them here? We can do it, examples are in `Another way to implement eDSL is tagless final.` part. This one is just our manually created minimal examples without libs just to show how it works. Or maybe I didn't understand you

}

> type URIS = keyof URItoKind<unknown>;

Reviewer 3: What's an `unknown`?

type URIS2 = keyof URItoKind2<unknown, unknown>;

> type Kind<F extends URIS, A> = URItoKind<A>[F];

Reviewer 3: ~What is going on here? How does it work?~ I get it now, but it should be described verbatin - "we create interface A so we can later B".

type Kind2<F extends URIS2, A, B> = URItoKind2<A, B>[F];
```

And now we can return to `Collection` above and implement it using kinds.

```typescript
interface Collection<F extends URIS> {
  create: <A>() => Kind<F, A>;
  insert: <A>(v: A) => (c: Kind<F, A>) => Kind<F, A>;
}

const collectionArray: Collection<"Array"> = {
  create: () => [],
  insert: (v) => (c) => [...c, v]
};

> ```

Reviewer 3: Ok, so the previous version did not compile.

```typescript
type Nil = "nil";

type Vec<A, N extends Nat> = N extends Succ<infer R> ? Cons<A, R> : Nil;

type Cons<A, N extends Nat> = {a: A, v: Vec<A, N>};

const emptyVec: <A>() => Vec<A, Zero> = () => "nil";

const pushVec: <A, N extends Nat>(a: A, v: Vec<A, N>) => Vec<A, Succ<N>> = (a, v) => {
  return {a, v}
};

let empty: Vec<number, Zero> = emptyVec();
let oneElem: Vec<number, Succ<Zero>> = pushVec(1, empty);
let twoElems: Vec<number, Succ<Succ<Zero>>> = pushVec(2, oneElem);
let twoElemsInvalid: Vec<number, Succ<Zero>> = pushVec(2, oneElem); // error
oneElem = twoElems; // error
```

This was a simple example what we can do with type level programming.
Using such primitives we can implement different operations of such types and even Fibonacci implementation for example.
Follow Mathias Jean Johansen [blog post](https://mjj.io/2021/03/29/type-level-programming-in-typescript/) of mentioned above Yuriy Bogomolov [examples](https://github.com/YBogomolov/talk-typelevel-ts/blob/master/src/typelevel.d.ts).

```typescript
type Fibonacci<N, F0 = Zero, F1 = One> = {
  acc: F0
  n: N extends Succ<infer _> ? Fibonacci<Decrement<N>, F1, Add<F0, F1>> : never

> }[IfElse<Equals<Zero, N>, "acc", "n">]

Reviewer 3: _Why._

Okay. So this thing is outright made from high-circle magic spells. What's `infer _`?

```

### GADT and eDSL

> Generalized algebraic data types in Haskell give us an ability to manually write types of the constructors.

Reviewer 3: No, they give us ability to construct/match objects of type `Foo a b c` with some of `a`, `b` or/and `c` constrained to be certain types or to have constraints like `Eq a` or `Action a c`.

For
```haskell
data Exp a where
  Var :: Name -> Exp Int
  Lam :: Name -> Exp a -> Exp (Int -> a)
  App :: Exp (a -> b) -> Exp a -> Exp b
```
You can't construct general `Exp b` - the `b` by definition must be an `Int` or a function.
When you match an `Exp` and get a `Var` you know that it's type is `Exp Int`.

Which allows you to write
```haskell
eval :: Map String Int -> Exp a -> Maybe a
eval scope (Var n) = Map.lookup n scope
eval scope ... = ...
```
In the first clause of the function we get local `a ~ Int` constraint, and therefore we _have to_ return `Maybe Int`.

and the resulting `a` will be the same as the `a` carried by the concrete `Exp` you plug into the function.

----

"Manually writing" is just a consequence.

Having data type `D a` with type value `a` we are able to create constructors like `C :: Int -> D Int`.

> The key feature here is that Haskell may say us about equality of types `a` and `Int` here.

Reviewer 3: I'm sorry for the rant above ._.

TypeScript on the other hand doesn't have such ability.
Nevertheless, we can manually say for it about such equality passing the proof to it.

The other great feature of this approach is that we can make nice eDSL using GADT.
And again TypeScript will not give you such a good eDSL as a result, but it doesn't mean that we can't do it.

```typescript
import { identity } from "fp-ts/lib/function";

interface Equality<A, B> {

>   (a: A): B;

Reviewer 3: Wut. Plz explain the magics.

Reviewer 3: Does that mean, that `Equality` should be a funciton `A -> B`?

Reviewer 3: Ah, I see

Author: yes

}

type ArithExpr<A> =
  | { type: "Num"; v: number; proof: Equality<number, A> }
  | { type: "Plus"; l: ArithExpr<number>; r: ArithExpr<number>; proof: Equality<number, A> }
  | { type: "Gt"; l: ArithExpr<number>; r: ArithExpr<number>; proof: Equality<boolean, A> }
  | { type: "And"; l: ArithExpr<boolean>; r: ArithExpr<boolean>; proof: Equality<boolean, A> };

const num: (v: number) => ArithExpr<number> = (v) => {

>   return { type: "Num", v, proof: identity };

Reviewer 3: The `Equality`/`identity` trick should be explained.

};

const plus: (l: ArithExpr<number>, r: ArithExpr<number>) => ArithExpr<number> = (l, r) => {
  return { type: "Plus", l, r, proof: identity };
};

const gt: (l: ArithExpr<number>, r: ArithExpr<number>) => ArithExpr<boolean> = (l, r) => {
  return { type: "Gt", l, r, proof: identity };
};

const and: (l: ArithExpr<boolean>, r: ArithExpr<boolean>) => ArithExpr<boolean> = (l, r) => {
  return { type: "And", l, r, proof: identity };
};

const interpret: <A>(expr: ArithExpr<A>) => A = (expr) => {
  switch (expr.type) {
    case "Num":
      return expr.proof(expr.v);
    case "Plus":
      return expr.proof(interpret(expr.l) + interpret(expr.r));
    case "Gt":
      return expr.proof(interpret(expr.l) > interpret(expr.r));
    case "And":
      return expr.proof(interpret(expr.l) && interpret(expr.r));
    default:
      return expr;
  }
};

const testExpr = and(gt(plus(num(23), num(12)), num(170)), gt(num(35), num(47)));
interpret(testExpr); // false

const wrongExpr = and(num(23), num(12)); // error
```

Another way to implement eDSL is tagless final.
Moving from data type to type class we are able to implement the same logic.
We will use `fp-ts` to implement it.

```typescript

> import { Kind, URIS } from "fp-ts/HKT";

Reviewer 3: What's the `Kind` here? How is it [un]related to haskell's definition of `Kind` (type of types)?

The `URIS` sounds like `URI`. Please expain what it is.

Reviewer 2: The scope of the post is really large, the difficulty of described concepts grows exponentially throughout the text, so many such issues arise.

But need to say, things that are now explained (like `Kind`) looked explained quite well to me and embedded into the text nicely. At least those that are similar to what I have already worked with in Haskell. Other things still look mind-blowing, but that's probably exactly the scope of the post to only provide the transition from known Haskell concepts to TS.

type ArithExpr<Expr extends URIS> = {
  num: (v: number) => Kind<Expr, number>;
  plus: (l: Kind<Expr, number>, r: Kind<Expr, number>) => Kind<Expr, number>;
  gt: (l: Kind<Expr, number>, r: Kind<Expr, number>) => Kind<Expr, boolean>;
  and: (l: Kind<Expr, boolean>, r: Kind<Expr, boolean>) => Kind<Expr, boolean>;
};

> type Interpreter<A> = {

Reviewer 3: After reading the code block to the end, I start wondering what the `A` here really is. Plz explain how it is connected to other spells.

  interpret: A;
};

type ToS<A> = {
  toString: string;

> };

Reviewer 3: Shouldn't `ToS` be `Interpreter<String>`?

Author: Hm, the idea was to take example from our fp course https://slides.com/fp-ctd/lecture-11#/18/0/1

And as I understand the problem (or it is not a problem) here is that it is an imitation of HKT. Also we can add to `URItoKind` anything we want. Also we use just type aliases. So, yes I can write just `Interpreter<String>` but I wanted to make it look similar to Haskell.

Also I don't really know what different interpreter to write as we don't use `<A>` in `ToS` (but we also don't use it in Haskell implementation)

So, if you have any ideas I will change it.

> declare module "fp-ts/lib/HKT" {

Reviewer 3: I just found I know anything about TS module system.

  interface URItoKind<A> {
    readonly Interpreter: Interpreter<A>;
    readonly ToS: ToS<A>;
  }
}

> const arithInterpreter: ArithExpr<"Interpreter"> = {

Reviewer 3: > ArithExpr<"Interpreter">

What. How does it work? Please explain why are we putting a name of a field here.

Reviewer 3: I guess, URI is an interface to string-like objects, but what is it here, exactly?

Author: Hm, I thought that HKT part explain it (do I need to explain in here again?) \
`URIS` is just keys(properties) of `URItoKind` where `URItoKind` is like map from keys to types \
Here we say that `ArithExpr` take `Expr extends URIS` and types in `ArithExpr` will be `Kind<Expr, number>` for example where `Kind` is a type from `URItoKind` with concrete keys(properties) from `URIS` \
:ghc: \
Let's think how to make it more understandable if `HTK` part doesn't describe it

  num: (v: number) => {
    return { interpret: v };
  },
  plus: (l: Interpreter<number>, r: Interpreter<number>) => {
    return { interpret: l.interpret + r.interpret };
  },
  gt: (l: Interpreter<number>, r: Interpreter<number>) => {
    return { interpret: l.interpret > r.interpret };
  },
  and: (l: Interpreter<boolean>, r: Interpreter<boolean>) => {
    return { interpret: l.interpret && r.interpret };
  },
};

const arithToS: ArithExpr<"ToS"> = {
  num: (v: number) => {
    return { toString: v.toString() };
  },
  plus: (l: ToS<number>, r: ToS<number>) => {
    return { toString: `(${l.toString} + ${r.toString})` };
  },
  gt: (l: ToS<number>, r: ToS<number>) => {
    return { toString: `(${l.toString} > ${r.toString})` };
  },
  and: (l: ToS<boolean>, r: ToS<boolean>) => {
    return { toString: `(${l.toString} && ${r.toString})` };
  },
};

const testExpr: <Expr extends URIS>(E: ArithExpr<Expr>) => Kind<Expr, boolean> = (E) =>
  E.and(E.gt(E.plus(E.num(23), E.num(12)), E.num(170)), E.gt(E.num(35), E.num(47)));

testExpr(arithInterpreter).interpret; // false
testExpr(arithToS).toString; // (((23 + 12) > 170) && (35 > 47))

> ```

Reviewer 3: The code above looks deceptively similar to haskell implementation, but in reality, there's a lot of magic in need of explanation.

Reviewer 3: For the blocks of code, I usually consider them subjectively understandable, if I can sit and make an analogous code myself, given the example and an explanation.

Here, I can't, because there is no textual explanation.

As in the previous parts you can also see more complex examples in Yuriy Bogomolov [edsl workshop](https://github.com/YBogomolov/workshop-edsl-in-typescript/tree/master) and Giulio Canti [example](https://gist.github.com/gcanti/9a0c2a666621f03b80457831ff3ab997).

> ## Conclusion

Reviewer: Perhaps add a summary of the article here

Author: Hm, what kind of summary it should be?

Reviewer: Rather generic: what you talked about in the article, some main points repeated, perhaps some links to other places.

Generally you can write web applications almost on every language.

Because we like Haskell, maybe we can write our Web application on functional languages or even on Haskell? And the answer is yes.
There is strongly-typed PureScript with Haskell like syntax, purely functional Elm, Reflex framework for Haskell with GHCJS, F# with Fabel.

Unfortunately they don't give us proper flexibility in working with JS libraries which number is enormous and take more time on fixing related problems.
Additionally, customers will be locked in this solution when they will need to maintenance such applications.
On the other hand TypeScript with a huge community and modern technologies from the box is a great decision.

In this article we don't have a goal to cover all similarities or differences.
We also will not say about disadvantages of TypeScript type system against Haskell or how it works under the hood.
Our goal is to show what and how you can use types in TypeScript.

## Base concepts

Unlike Haskell in TypeScript types are not the center part of the language.
They just help programmers to write stricter and more understandable code, making their life easier.

> You can use types like `any` and nobody pushes you into strict frames.

Reviewer: Do you mean anything specific by "strict frames"? I don't get it.

Author: Looks like I need word `framework` here

```typescript
type Document = {
  name: string;
  athor?: string;
}
```

#### Newtype

Creating a `newtype` is not so trivial.
There is no such analog in TypeScript, but you can do it using tags.

And here is how all this magic works.
With intersection types (& syntax) you can add `tag` field for your type.
Using `symbol` you are able to declare const-named properties on types.
Word `unique` means that they are unique.
Your type is tagged with unique symbol.

```typescript
type Email = string & { readonly __tag: unique symbol };
type City = string & { readonly __tag: unique symbol };
```

Using `as` which means type assertion you are able to cast your base type to tagged type.
And when you will try to pass value of another tagged type, compiler will say that two unique symbols are different.

```typescript
function sendMessage(email: Email);

sendMessage("message"); // Argument of type 'string' is not assignable to parameter of type 'Email'.
sendMessage("St. Petersburg" as City); // Argument of type 'City' is not assignable to parameter of type 'Email'.

sendMessage("email@gmail.com" as Email); // Ok
```

Anyway, this is not an ideal solution for newtypes.

> There is a [comment](https://github.com/Microsoft/TypeScript/issues/4895#issuecomment-401067935) in issue with a better solution.

Reviewer: If that one is better, I have a question as a reader as to why I was provided with a worse one?

Author: It is better for like complex system and it is also complex for this example.

Reviewer: `While this is the simplest solution for newtypes, it is not the best for complex systems. For a better (but more complex) one, check this [comment](https://github.com/Microsoft/TypeScript/issues/4895#issuecomment-401067935) in TypeScript's issues. `

Reviewer: I think this would sound better, then.

And there is also a [library](https://github.com/sveseme/taghiro) which provide more pretty implementation for them.

### Unit types, Unions, Data types, and Pattern Matching

Haskell ADT is a constantly used functionality of language.
It allows you to build your own big types from small blocks.
And with pattern matching it is easy to get access to this data.

Unfortunately there is no same way to build ADT, but we will start from the easiest enums and move to the more complex things showing what we can do using existing type system in TypeScript.

#### Unit types

Unit types are subtypes of primitive types that contain exactly one primitive value.
You can use it like enums setting unique string values.

> Or even use different values types.

Reviewer: This sentence is unclear, do you mean: "types with different values"?

```typescript
type Result = true | "error" | 5;
```

> You can pass it to the function and match by a concret type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can pass it to the function and match by the concrete type.
```

I assume

```typescript
const resultInterpreter = (result: Result): string => {
  if (result === true) {
    return "true";
  }
  if (result === "error") {
    return result;
  }
  return "five";
};
```

#### Unions

Moving forward the next feature is Unions.

> Unions are not tagged, so it is just a condition of possible types.

Reviewer: condition is not really the best word I think, "they are just sets of possible types"

```typescript
type Result = string | number | (() => string);
```

> Here and in the example with Unit types if you already matched by some type compiler will know that it will not be present in the future.

Reviewer: word "matched" implies that it was matched successfully, I would use "failed to match" in this paragraph.

As in the first `if` we matched `typeof result === "number"` then we know that in the code below it may be only `function` or `string`.
And we can simply run `lenght.toString()` on this value as both `function` and `string` have property `lenght` even if `number` doesn't have such property.
But we can't `call` this value as `string` is not callable and we can do it only after matching with `string`.

```typescript
const resultInterpreter = (result: Result): string | undefined => {
  if (typeof result === "number") {
      return result.toFixed();
  }

  // Okay: return result.lenght.toString(); 
  // Error: return result();

  if (typeof result === "string") {
      return result.toLocaleUpperCase();
  }

  return result();
};
```

> #### Discriminated Unions or Datatype analogue

Reviewer: I don't think you need to write Union with capital U, please make it lowercase everywhere that I missed. :D

> Going deeper using Unions, it is possible to construct data type analog.

Reviewer: By going deeper with unions, it is possible to construct an analogue of Haskell data types?

It is called discriminated Unions.
The idea is to store special property for each variant which will allow switching on it.

```typescript
type Result = 
  | {type: "error"; message: string}
  | {type: "result"; value: number}

const resultInterpreter = (result: Result): string => {
  switch (result.type) {
    case "error":
      return result.message;
    case "result":
      return `valid ${result.value.toString()}`;
    default:
      return "impossible";
  }
};
```

#### Pattern Matching

This is the very simple examples of working with ADT like structures in TypeScript.
Using type parameters you are also able to make some more complex things like [such](https://github.com/pfgray/ts-adt) library for ADTs.
But one of the most useful features of Haskell connected with ADTs is pattern matching.

> In allows you to disclose you structure comparing it with some pattern and based on this condition execute some code.

Reviewer: I was not able to understand this sentence, sorry. :D

There is [no such functionality](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-pattern-matching) in TypeScript but [ts-pattern](https://github.com/gvergnaud/ts-pattern) will bring it to you.
Example from repository:

```typescript
type Data =
  | { type: 'text'; content: string }
  | { type: 'img'; src: string };

type Result =
  | { type: 'ok'; data: Data }
  | { type: 'error'; error: Error };

const result: Result = ...;

return match(result)
  .with({ type: 'error' }, (res) => `<p>Oups! An error occured</p>`)
  .with({ type: 'ok', data: { type: 'text' } }, (res) => `<p>${res.data.content}</p>`)
  .with({ type: 'ok', data: { type: 'img', src: select() } }, (src) => `<img src=${src} />`)
  .exhaustive();
```

### Immutability

TypeScript has two base primitives to work with immutability: const and readonly.

> The first one is used to prevent variable reference change.

Reviewer: Can you just say "to prevent reassigning variables"?

Reviewer 3: Reference to the variable didn't change here, it is "on the same address", in terms of js references. The value did. Well, the reference can change, too, if you assign `a = b`, but the example shows us different scenario.

So, in the `const a` the `a` is _directly_ immutable (but you still can assign fields, I guess) and in `readonly a:` the field is inassignable.

With `const a = [1, 2, 3]` or `readonly x: number[]` you still will be able to change the content of array.
Let's introduce more cases and how you can deal with them in TypeScript.

The first one is `Readonly` type. With it you can mark all properties as `readonly`.
```typescript
type A = {
  x: number;
  y: number;
};

type ImmutableA = Readonly<A>; 
const a: ImmutableA = { x: 1, y: 2 };
a.x = 2; // Cannot assign to 'x' because it is a read-only property.
a.y = 1; // Cannot assign to 'y' because it is a read-only property.
```

The second one is `ReadonlyArray` which make all array elements as `readonly`.

```typescript
const arr: ReadonlyArray<number> = [1, 2, 3];
arr[0] = 4; // Index signature in type 'readonly number[]' only permits reading.
```

You can also make `readonly` dictionary for example.
```typescript
interface A {
    readonly [x: string]: number;
}

const a: A = { x: 1, y: 2 };
a.x = 2; // Index signature in type 'A' only permits reading.
a.y = 1; // Index signature in type 'A' only permits reading.
```

Also be careful passing object with readonly fields to function as it may be changed inside the function.
It is happening because of information loss.

> Object with the type which include `readonly` is a subtype of the type without it and function argument with more common type know nothing about its subtype.

Reviewer: Do function arguments know things?

As a result, you should always write proper types of arguments.

```typescript
const a: { readonly x: number } = { x: 1 };

const changeA = (arg: { x: number }): void => {
  const argC = arg;
  argC.x = 2;
}

changeA(a);
a.x; // 2
```

Now you get more flexible way to make things readonly.
Although now you can get immutable objects usually you don't need them as is.
You want to make some actions on them and make new immutable objects.
But it is not so easy.
You will need to construct new objects by hands, you can also use `Writable` utility type, but it still is not really simple to copy and construct new objects.

Let's introduce some libraries which may help you deal with this issue.
The first one and the most powerful is [immer](https://immerjs.github.io/immer/).
It is used for immutable state flow.

> Immutable data is not copied but shared in memory.

Reviewer: Is this a statement about all immutable data or about what immer lets you to do?

});
```

And finally there are three more interesting libraries for working with immutable structures which may be more familiar for Haskell devs: [partial.lenses](https://github.com/calmm-js/partial.lenses), [monocle-ts](https://github.com/gcanti/monocle-ts), and [optics-ts](https://github.com/akheron/optics-ts).
These are optics libraries.
Unfortunately the first one doesn't have type bindings.
The second one support TypeScript and is a partial porting of Scala monocle.
And the last one is the newest and TypeScript oriented optics library.

### High Order functions and Currying

A lot of languages support High Order functions and TypeScript is not an exception.
You can use functions as an argument and also return them.

```typescript
const filterArray = (fn: (elem: string) => boolean, arr: string[]): string[] => {
  const newArray: string[] = [];
  for (let i = 0; i < arr.length; i++) {
    if (fn(arr[i])) {
      newArray.push(arr[i]);
    }
  }
  return newArray; // or just simply return arr.filter(fn);
};

const f = (x: string): ((s: number) => boolean) => {
  return (s: number) => {
    return s.toString() === x;
  };
};

f("5")(5) // true;
```

> As you may see in the last example, we can call function `f` and return function from it, applying in for the new argument.

Reviewer: Don't get the last clause of the sentence.
